docs:#524 list required S3 permissions (#800)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/manage/pages/topic-iceberg-integration.adoc

= Topics as Iceberg Tables
:description: Learn how to integrate Redpanda topics with Iceberg.
:page-context-links: [{"name": "Linux", "to": "manage:topic-iceberg-integration.adoc" } ]
:page-categories: Management, High Availability

The Redpanda integration with Apache Iceberg allows your topic data to be stored in the cloud in Iceberg's table format. This opens up immediate access to your streaming data for analytical systems such as data warehouses like RedShift, Snowflake, and Clickhouse, and big data processing platforms such as Apache Spark and Flink, without setting up and maintaining additional ETL pipelines. 

== Prerequisites

include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]

. To check if you already have a license key applied to your cluster:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster license info
----

. Install `rpk`.

> == Limitations

Reviewer: Is REST API support for the catalog available in beta?

Reviewer 2: Yes, it is -- but just to be clear, we don't PROVIDE a catalog, we WRITE to another vendor's catalog.  The way Iceberg works is that you create all these data files, and some metadata files, and then you tell a Catalog about them.  We'll be creating the data files out of Kafka topic contents, and we'll generate the relevant metadata, but then we'll call some datalake or other system's catalog by using the REST API and effectively say to that system (like a Snowflake, or Databricks, or whatever), "here is all this new content, add these tables to your datalake"

Reviewer 2: Actually let me amend that.  We don't provide a REST-based catalog.  We CAN generate a pure filesystem-based catalog, which some analytic tools can probably make use of.  But the more sophisticated systems, the data lakes, they HAVE their own catalog.  And in those cases, since the data tables are creating are meant to be additions to those existing datalakes, we end up adding our tables and metadata to their systems by adding/creating entries in THEIR system's catalog.

Reviewer 3: Yup.

* You can only enable the Iceberg integration when creating a new Redpanda topic. 
* It is not possible to append or backfill data from Redpanda topics to an existing Iceberg table.

> * JSON schemas are not currently supported.

Reviewer: Is Avro supported for beta?

Reviewer 2: With the limitation that no single item in the schema be more than 128K.  It would be incredibly unusual, but not impossible, to find a schema with such an entry.

** Manifest list: Tracks all the manifest files belonging to a table, including file paths and upper and lower bounds for partition fields. 
** Metadata file: Stores metadata about the table, including its schema, partition information, and snapshots. Whenever a change is made to the table, a new metadata file is created and becomes the latest version of the metadata in the catalog.
--
+
In the Redpanda Iceberg integration, the manifest files are in JSON format.
* Catalog: Contains the current metadata pointer for the table. Clients reading and writing data to the table see the same version of the current state of the table. Redpanda creates the catalog in JSON format.

When you enable the Iceberg integration for a Redpanda topic, Redpanda brokers store streaming data in the Iceberg-compatible format in Parquet files in object storage, in addition to writing Kafka messages stored in segment files on disk. Storing the streaming data in Iceberg tables in the cloud allows you to derive real-time insights through business intelligence and machine learning tools that work with Iceberg. 

> 

Reviewer: Should we use the same [graphic](https://www.redpanda.com/blog/apache-iceberg-topics-streaming-data) from the blog post for this section? Matt also used one in his SE enablement [slide deck](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1vLI46jHyjO6uaqe7dt2SFzUjDdDHmrT52S6OnZuRJWY/edit?usp=sharing) (slide 8) that might be a fit, but it probably needs to be edited as we do not mean to imply that the Iceberg tables can also be accessed from the read cache.

Reviewer 2: I think the graphic from the blog post is actually really good.

Reviewer: I've added the [image](https://github.com/redpanda-data/docs/pull/800/files#diff-f76ac30c217776d0e31009546ec966f1f312c8add9b7e18e74de043210486315) from the blog post for now, but will request a new version for docs from the design team.

== Enable Iceberg integration

> 

Reviewer: Should we include the steps for configuring object storage, and are they the same steps as in the Tiered Storage docs https://docs.redpanda.com/current/manage/tiered-storage/#configure-object-storage? (No need to go as far as enabling Tiered Storage?)

Reviewer 2: They must actually have enabled Tiered Storage.  We store the Iceberg files (both data and metadata) in the bucket used by Tiered Storage.

Reviewer 3: Yeah this point should be up front (that it's based on and requires TS and linking to those docs on how to setup TS if you haven't already)

Reviewer 4: To be very clear, you need TS enabled for the cluster but not the iceberg topics. Although we expect people to have both on in the common case at the moment.

----

. Create a new topic.
+
[,bash,]
----
rpk topic create <new-topic> --partitions 1 --replicas 1
----
+
[,bash,.no-copy]
----
TOPIC       STATUS
new-topic   OK
----

. Enable the integration for the topic. 
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic alter-config <new-topic> --set iceberg_topic=true 
----
+
[,bash,.no-copy]
----
TOPIC       STATUS
new-topic   OK
----

. Optional: Register a schema for the topic. Redpanda uses the schema to derive the Iceberg table format and write data files to object storage in this format. Protobuf schemas are supported.
+
If you don't configure a schema for the topic, Redpanda by default uses a simple schema consisting of the record’s key, value, and the original message timestamp. If you don't have a need for a strict schema and can use the data in a more semi-structured format, consider the schemaless approach.
+
[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create <new-topic> --schema </path-to-schema> --type <format>
----
+
[,bash,.no-copy]
----
SUBJECT     VERSION   ID   TYPE
new-topic   1         1    PROTOBUF
----

As you produce messages to the topic, the data also becomes available to consume from object storage by Iceberg-compliant clients.

> == Consume data in Iceberg tables

Reviewer: Should we just repurpose the same Clickhouse example (with the schemaless option) from our demos?

Reviewer 2: I think it would be great to show one schemaless and one with a schema.  Reach out to Andrew Wong to ask for a simple example with a schema.

Reviewer 3: In addition to one with schema and one with schemaless, it would also be really nice to show both ways of integration between the Iceberg reader and Redpanda, meaning:

- 1 example consuming data via a system using an external REST catalog (e.g. when using Polaris catalog in Snowflake) by just doing SHOW TABLES and seeing the table and querying it via SQL
-  another example consuming the data programmatically in a way that points to the catalog files in S3.  E.g. a Spark SQL user setting up their connection to the iceberg data by pointing to it directly, presumably by setting the LOCATION attribute. Some guidance is here: https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/spark-ddl/. but @jcipar  probably has the exact code required

:page-context-links: [{"name": "Linux", "to": "manage:topic-iceberg-integration.adoc" } ]
:page-categories: Management, High Availability, Data Replication, Integration

The Redpanda integration with Apache Iceberg allows your topic data to be stored in the cloud in Iceberg's table format. This opens up immediate access to your streaming data for analytical systems such as data warehouses like RedShift, Snowflake, and Clickhouse, and big data processing platforms such as Apache Spark and Flink, without setting up and maintaining additional ETL pipelines. 

The Iceberg integration uses xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage]. When a cluster or topic is enabled with Tiered Storage, Redpanda stores the Iceberg files in the configured Tiered Storage bucket or container.  

== Prerequisites

include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]

. To check if you already have a license key applied to your cluster:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster license info
----

. Enable xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc#set-up-tiered-storage[Tiered Storage] for the topics for which you want to generate Iceberg tables.
. Install `rpk`.

== Limitations

> * You can only enable the topic integration for new Redpanda topics. 

Reviewer: Can I get SME confirmation that this is correct? Or can the integration also be enabled for existing topics that already have data (presumably also in Tiered Storage)?

= Topics as Iceberg Tables
:description: Learn how to integrate Redpanda topics with Apache Iceberg.
:page-context-links: [{"name": "Linux", "to": "manage:topic-iceberg-integration.adoc" } ]
:page-categories: Management, High Availability, Data Replication, Integration

> The Redpanda integration with Apache Iceberg allows your topic data to be stored in the cloud in Iceberg's table format. This opens up immediate access to your streaming data for analytical systems such as data warehouses like RedShift, Snowflake, and Clickhouse, and big data processing platforms such as Apache Spark and Flink, without setting up and maintaining additional ETL pipelines. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Redpanda's integration with Apache Iceberg allows you to store topic data in the cloud in Iceberg's table format. This makes your streaming data available to analytical systems, such as data warehouses like RedShift, Snowflake, and Clickhouse, and big data processing platforms, such as Apache Spark and Flink, without setting up and maintaining additional ETL pipelines. 
```
Just suggestions...

Reviewer 5: @kbatuigas. This comment just gets round passive voice "to be" and also attempts to split up the longer sentences.

> The Iceberg integration uses xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage]. When a cluster or topic is enabled with Tiered Storage, Redpanda stores the Iceberg files in the configured Tiered Storage bucket or container.  

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Iceberg integration uses xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage]. When a cluster or topic has Tiered Storage enabled, Redpanda stores the Iceberg files in the configured Tiered Storage bucket or container.  
```

== Prerequisites

> include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]

Reviewer 5: This partial still says "self-hosted". I think we say self-managed everywhere now don't we?

. To check if you already have a license key applied to your cluster:
+
[,bash]
----

> rpk cluster license info

Reviewer 5: Is this the right way round? Wouldn't you need to install `rpk` before you can run this command?

----

. Enable xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc#set-up-tiered-storage[Tiered Storage] for the topics for which you want to generate Iceberg tables.
. Install `rpk`.

== Limitations

> * You can only enable the topic integration for new Redpanda topics. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* You can only enable Iceberg topic integration for new Redpanda topics. 
```

* It is not possible to append or backfill data from Redpanda topics to an existing Iceberg table.

> * JSON schemas are not currently supported. For Avro schemas, records cannot contain fields greater than 128KB.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* JSON schemas are not currently supported. For Avro schemas, records cannot contain fields greater than 128 KB.
```

* You can only use one schema per topic. Schema versioning as well as upcasting (where a value is cast into its more generic data type) are not supported. 

== Architecture 

> Apache Iceberg is an open source format specification for defining structured tables in a glossterm:data lake[]. The table format enables you to easily and quickly manage, query, and process huge amounts of structured and unstructured data, like you would manage and run SQL queries against relational data in a database or data warehouse. The open format allows many different languages, tools, and applications to process the same data in a consistent way, so you can avoid vendor lock-in. This data management system is also referred to as a _data lakehouse_.

Reviewer 5: The data lake glossary term isn't showing in the preview.

> Apache Iceberg is an open source format specification for defining structured tables in a glossterm:data lake[]. The table format enables you to easily and quickly manage, query, and process huge amounts of structured and unstructured data, like you would manage and run SQL queries against relational data in a database or data warehouse. The open format allows many different languages, tools, and applications to process the same data in a consistent way, so you can avoid vendor lock-in. This data management system is also referred to as a _data lakehouse_.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Apache Iceberg is an open source format specification for defining structured tables in a glossterm:data lake[]. The table format lets you quickly and easily manage, query, and process huge amounts of structured and unstructured data. This is similar to the way in which you would manage and run SQL queries against relational data in a database or data warehouse. The open format lets you use many different languages, tools, and applications to process the same data in a consistent way, so you can avoid vendor lock-in. This data management system is referred to as a _data lakehouse_.
```
Just suggestions.

In the Iceberg specification, tables comprise the following:

* Data layer

> ** Data files: Store the actual data. The Redpanda integration currently supports the Parquet file format. Parquet files are column-based and suitable for analytical workloads at scale, and come with compression capabilities that optimize files for object storage. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
** Data files: Store the data. The Redpanda integration currently supports the Parquet file format. Parquet files are column-based and suitable for analytical workloads at scale. They come with compression capabilities that optimize files for object storage. 
```

> ** Data files: Store the actual data. The Redpanda integration currently supports the Parquet file format. Parquet files are column-based and suitable for analytical workloads at scale, and come with compression capabilities that optimize files for object storage. 

Reviewer 5: Not sure about this. Do we call this feature an Iceberg integration or Redpanda integration?

* Metadata layer
+
--

> ** Manifest files: Track data files and contain metadata about those files, such as record count, partition membership, and file paths.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
** Manifest files: Track data files and contain metadata about these files, such as record count, partition membership, and file paths.
```

** Manifest list: Tracks all the manifest files belonging to a table, including file paths and upper and lower bounds for partition fields. 
** Metadata file: Stores metadata about the table, including its schema, partition information, and snapshots. Whenever a change is made to the table, a new metadata file is created and becomes the latest version of the metadata in the catalog.
--
+
In the Redpanda Iceberg integration, the manifest files are in JSON format.
* Catalog: Contains the current metadata pointer for the table. Clients reading and writing data to the table see the same version of the current state of the table. You'll configure your Iceberg catalog to point to your object storage bucket or container where the Redpanda data in Iceberg format is located. Redpanda uses the https://iceberg.apache.org/concepts/catalog/#catalog-implementations[Iceberg REST catalog^] endpoint to update your catalog when there are changes to the Iceberg data and metadata.

> image::shared:iceberg-integration.png[]

Reviewer 5: I know there's probably not time for this but I could do with some numbering on this diagram.

Reviewer: @mattschumpert does adding numbering in the provided diagram (same as the one used in the blog post from a while back) sound good? Is there anything else we should add to the design request in [Monday](https://redpanda.monday.com/boards/2297694569/pulses/7628352596)?

Reviewer 3: not sure I understood this.  if you want to narrate the diagram in the text and add numbers , fine with me.

Reviewer 3: makes sense to add numbers

> When you enable the Iceberg integration for a Redpanda topic, Redpanda brokers store streaming data in the Iceberg-compatible format in Parquet files in object storage, in addition to writing events stored in segment files on disk. Storing the streaming data in Iceberg tables in the cloud allows you to derive real-time insights through business intelligence and machine learning tools that work with Iceberg. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When you enable the Iceberg integration for a Redpanda topic, Redpanda brokers store streaming data in the Iceberg-compatible format in Parquet files in object storage. The brokers also write events to segment files stored on disk. Storing the streaming data in Iceberg tables in the cloud allows you to derive real-time insights through compatible business intelligence and machine learning tools. 
```
Just suggestions.

== Enable Iceberg integration

> To use the Iceberg integration for a topic, you must set Redpanda cluster configuration `enable_datalake` to true, and also explicitly set the topic configuration to `true`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To use the Iceberg integration for a topic, you must set the cluster configuration option `enable_datalake` to `true`, and also explicitly set the topic configuration to `true`.
```
Also, do we need to talk about the optional step in the task introduction?

> . Enable the Iceberg integration for the cluster by setting the cluster configuration `enable_datalake` to `true`. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Set the `enable_datalake` configuration option on your cluster to `true`. 
```

+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set enable_datalake true 
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
Successfully updated configuration. New configuration version is 2.
----

. Create a new topic.
+
[,bash,]
----
rpk topic create <new-topic-name> --partitions 1 --replicas 1
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

. Enable the integration for the topic. 
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic alter-config <new-topic-name> --set iceberg_topic=true 
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

> . Optional: Register a schema for the topic. Redpanda uses xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-id-validation.adoc#set-subject-name-strategy-per-topic[`TopicNameStrategy`] (`<topic-name>-value` or `<topic-name>-key`) to find the matching schema based on the subject name. Redpanda derives the Iceberg table format from the schema and writes data files to object storage in this format. Protobuf and Avro schemas are supported.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Register a schema for the topic (optional). Redpanda uses xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-id-validation.adoc#set-subject-name-strategy-per-topic[`TopicNameStrategy`] (`<topic-name>-value` or `<topic-name>-key`) to find the matching schema based on the subject name. Redpanda derives the Iceberg table format from the schema and writes data files to object storage in this format. Protobuf and Avro schemas are supported.
```

+

> If there is no registered schema for the topic, Redpanda by default uses a simple schema consisting of the record’s key, value, and the original event timestamp. If you don't have a need for a strict schema and can use the data in a more semi-structured format, consider the schemaless approach.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If there is no registered schema for the topic, Redpanda uses a simple schema consisting of the record’s key, value, and the original event timestamp. Consider the schemaless approach if you can use the data in a more semi-structured format.
```

+
[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create <subject-name> --schema </path-to-schema> --type <format>
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
SUBJECT                VERSION   ID   TYPE
new-topic-name-value   1         1    PROTOBUF
----

> As you produce records to the topic, the data also becomes available to consume from object storage by Iceberg-compatible clients. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As you produce records to the topic, the data also becomes available in object storage for consumption by Iceberg-compatible clients. 
```
Just a suggestion. Please check for accuracy.

== Consume data in Iceberg tables

> You can use the same analytical tools to access table data just like you would in a relational database or data lake.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can use the same analytical tools to access table data in a data lake as you would for a relational database.
```

> For example, suppose you are producing the same stream of events to a topic `test_topic`, and another topic `test_topic_schemaless`. The topics have Tiered Storage configured to an AWS S3 bucket. A record looks like the following:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example, suppose you produce the same stream of events to a topic `test_topic`, and another topic `test_topic_schemaless`. The topics have Tiered Storage configured to an AWS S3 bucket. A record looks like the following:
```

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----

> 

Reviewer 5: missing content?

----

When you point your Iceberg-compatible tool or framework to the object storage location of the Iceberg tables, how you consume the data depends on whether you've registered a schema on which to base the table format. In either approach, you do not need to rely on complex ETL jobs or pipelines to consume real-time data from Redpanda.

=== Structured approach with schema

> If you register the following schema for `test_topic` under the `test_topic-value` subject:

Reviewer 5: This feels like an incomplete sentence. I can see the example relates to the section above but not really sure how. The same goes for the next example.

[,protobuf]
----
syntax = "proto3";

message twitter_record {
  string Topic = 1;
  string Sentiment = 2;
  int64 TweetId = 3;
  string TweetText = 4;
  string TweetDate = 5;
}
----

> Many platforms such as Clickhouse provide Iceberg integrations that allow you to easily access existing Iceberg tables in object storage. This example reads the data from `test_topic` into Clickhouse: 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Platforms such as Clickhouse provide Iceberg integrations to give easy access to existing Iceberg tables in object storage. This example reads the data from `test_topic` into Clickhouse: 
```

[,sql]
----
CREATE TABLE test_topic ENGINE=IcebergS3('<s3-bucket-url>', <aws-access-key-id>', '<aws-secret-access-key>', 'Parquet')
----

> The Iceberg data is available to query in Clickhouse. The table structure is derived from the schema, and in this case, the `test-topic` table contains columns based on the  values:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Iceberg data is available to query in Clickhouse. The table structure is derived from the schema. In this case, the `test-topic` table contains columns based on schema values:
```
Please check for accuracy.

[,sql]
----
SELECT
  Topic,
  Sentiment,
  TweetId,
  left(TweetText, 30)
FROM test_topic
----

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----

----

=== Schemaless approach

> You can also forgo using a schema, which means the data in Iceberg will be semi-structured. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can also forgo using a schema, which means using semi-structured data in Iceberg. 
```

=== Structured approach with schema

Register the following schema for `test_topic` under the `test_topic-value` subject:

[,protobuf]
----
syntax = "proto3";

message twitter_record {
  string Topic = 1;
  string Sentiment = 2;
  int64 TweetId = 3;
  string TweetText = 4;
  string TweetDate = 5;
}
----

[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create test_topic-value --schema path/to/schema.proto --type protobuf
----

Platforms such as Clickhouse provide Iceberg integrations to give easy access to existing Iceberg tables in object storage. This example reads the data from `test_topic` into Clickhouse: 

[,sql]
----
CREATE TABLE test_topic ENGINE=IcebergS3('<s3-bucket-url>', <aws-access-key-id>', '<aws-secret-access-key>', 'Parquet')
----

The Iceberg data is available to query in Clickhouse. The table structure is derived from the schema. In this case, the `test-topic` table contains columns based on the schema fields:

[,sql]
----
SELECT
  Topic,
  Sentiment,
  TweetId,
  left(TweetText, 30)
FROM test_topic
----

// add SQL output here to show structured table data
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----

> 

Reviewer 5: Blank row/code snippet

. Set the `enable_datalake` configuration option on your cluster to `true`. 
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set enable_datalake true 
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
Successfully updated configuration. New configuration version is 2.
----

. Create a new topic.
+
[,bash,]
----
rpk topic create <new-topic-name> --partitions 1 --replicas 1
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

. Enable the integration for the topic. 
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic alter-config <new-topic-name> --set iceberg_topic=true 
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

. Register a schema for the topic (optional). Redpanda uses xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-id-validation.adoc#set-subject-name-strategy-per-topic[`TopicNameStrategy`] (`<topic-name>-value` or `<topic-name>-key`) to find the matching schema based on the subject name. Redpanda derives the Iceberg table format from the schema and writes data files to object storage in this format. Protobuf and Avro schemas are supported.
+

> If there is no registered schema for the topic, Redpanda uses a simple schema consisting of the record’s key, value, and the original event timestamp. Consider the schemaless approach if you can use the data in a more semi-structured format.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If there is no registered schema for the topic, Redpanda uses a simple schema consisting of the record’s key, value, and the original event timestamp. Consider this schemaless approach if you can use the data in a more semi-structured format.
```

= Topics as Iceberg Tables
:description: Learn how to integrate Redpanda topics with Apache Iceberg.
:page-context-links: [{"name": "Linux", "to": "manage:topic-iceberg-integration.adoc" } ]
:page-categories: Management, High Availability, Data Replication, Integration
:page-beta: true

> The Apache Iceberg integration for Redpanda allows you to store topic data in the cloud in Iceberg's table format. This makes your streaming data immediately available for analytical systems, such as data warehouses like RedShift, Snowflake, and Clickhouse, and big data processing platforms, such as Apache Spark and Flink, without setting up and maintaining additional ETL pipelines. 

Reviewer 3: 'in the Iceberg open table format'

The Iceberg integration uses xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage]. When a cluster or topic has Tiered Storage enabled, Redpanda stores the Iceberg files in the configured Tiered Storage bucket or container.  

== Prerequisites

* Install `rpk`.

*  {empty}
include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]
+
To check if you already have a license key applied to your cluster:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster license info
----

* Enable xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc#set-up-tiered-storage[Tiered Storage] for the topics for which you want to generate Iceberg tables.

== Limitations

> * You can only enable Iceberg topic integration for new Redpanda topics. 

Reviewer 3: @andrwng this isn't really true though.  Just because we don't backfill doesn't mean you can't enable on existing topics

* It is not possible to append or backfill data from Redpanda topics to an existing Iceberg table.

> * JSON schemas are not currently supported. For Avro schemas, records cannot contain fields greater than 128 KB.

Reviewer 3: @rockwotj isn't this no longer the case?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* JSON schemas are not currently supported. If JSON is being used without the schema registery wire format, then use `key_value` to mode to land the JSON data in Iceberg, which then can be parsed by most query engines.
```

> * You can only use one schema per topic. Schema versioning as well as upcasting (where a value is cast into its more generic data type) are not supported. 

Reviewer 3: @rockwotj there is nuance here, we do some upcasting. How best to describe the current support for schema evolution / versioning.

You can update schemas in SR and only add columns? Some upcasting is done but some data types may still result in incompatible Iceberg types?  Please help here

== Architecture 

Apache Iceberg is an open source format specification for defining structured tables in a data lake. The table format lets you quickly and easily manage, query, and process huge amounts of structured and unstructured data. This is similar to the way in which you would manage and run SQL queries against relational data in a database or data warehouse. The open format lets you use many different languages, tools, and applications to process the same data in a consistent way, so you can avoid vendor lock-in. This data management system is referred to as a _data lakehouse_.

> In the Iceberg specification, tables comprise the following:

Reviewer 3: I think we mean," tables are composed of" , or ' multiple layers of files comprise a table'

* Data layer
** Data files: Store the data. The Iceberg integration currently supports the Parquet file format. Parquet files are column-based and suitable for analytical workloads at scale. They come with compression capabilities that optimize files for object storage. 
* Metadata layer
+
--
** Manifest files: Track data files and contain metadata about these files, such as record count, partition membership, and file paths.
** Manifest list: Tracks all the manifest files belonging to a table, including file paths and upper and lower bounds for partition fields. 
** Metadata file: Stores metadata about the table, including its schema, partition information, and snapshots. Whenever a change is made to the table, a new metadata file is created and becomes the latest version of the metadata in the catalog.
--
+
In the Redpanda Iceberg integration, the manifest files are in JSON format.

> * Catalog: Contains the current metadata pointer for the table. Clients reading and writing data to the table see the same version of the current state of the table. You'll configure your Iceberg catalog to point to your object storage bucket or container where the Redpanda data in Iceberg format is located. Redpanda uses the https://iceberg.apache.org/concepts/catalog/#catalog-implementations[Iceberg REST catalog^] endpoint to update your catalog when there are changes to the Iceberg data and metadata.

Reviewer 3: Maybe better to say 'can use'.  Use of an Iceberg REST catalog is optional.  One can also access Redpanda's iceberg files directly.

We should explain these 2 different approaches to using an Iceberg catalog and then point to REST catalog config details below

cc @mmaslankaprv  is the SME here

image::shared:iceberg-integration.png[]

> When you enable the Iceberg integration for a Redpanda topic, Redpanda brokers store streaming data in the Iceberg-compatible format in Parquet files in object storage. The brokers also write events to segment files stored on disk. Storing the streaming data in Iceberg tables in the cloud allows you to derive real-time insights through compatible business intelligence and machine learning tools. 

Reviewer 3: maybe  'many compatible Data Lakehouse, Machine Learning, Data Engineering and Business Intelligence Tools' and link to https://iceberg.apache.org/vendors/

== Enable Iceberg integration

To use the Iceberg integration for a topic, you must set the cluster configuration property `iceberg_enabled` to `true`, and also configure the topic property `redpanda.iceberg.mode`. You can choose to provide a schema if you need the Iceberg table to be structured with defined columns.

. Set the `iceberg_enabled` configuration option on your cluster to `true`. 
+
[,bash]
----

> rpk cluster config set enable_datalake true 

Reviewer 3: Wrong text for the property name @kbatuigas

----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
Successfully updated configuration. New configuration version is 2.
----

. Create a new topic.
+
[,bash,]
----
rpk topic create <new-topic-name> --partitions 1 --replicas 1
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

. Enable the integration for the topic by configuring `redpanda.iceberg.mode`. You can choose one of the following modes:
+
. `KEY_VALUE`: Creates an Iceberg table with a `Key` column and a `Value` column. Redpanda stores the raw topic content in the `Value` column.
. `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID_PREFIX`: Creates an Iceberg table whose structure matches the Redpanda schema for this topic, with columns corresponding to each field. Redpanda parses the topic values per field and stores them in the corresponding table columns. 

> . `DISABLED` (default): Disables the creation of an Iceberg table for this topic.

Reviewer 3: 'Disables writing to an iceberg table for this topic' (creation may already be done and we don't delete on 'DISABLE', right @andrwng)?

+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic alter-config <new-topic-name> --set redpanda.iceberg.mode=<topic-iceberg-mode>
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

> . Register a schema for the topic (optional). You must also set the `redpanda.iceberg.mode` topic property to `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID_PREFIX`. Redpanda uses xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-id-validation.adoc#set-subject-name-strategy-per-topic[`TopicNameStrategy`] (`<topic-name>-value` or `<topic-name>-key`) to find the matching schema based on the subject name. Redpanda derives the Iceberg table format from the schema and writes data files to object storage in this format. Protobuf and Avro schemas are supported.

Reviewer 3: We also need to point out that this mode relies on the use of [SerDes](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/fundamentals/serdes-develop/index.html#supported-formats) and the  [wire format](https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/schema-registry/fundamentals/serdes-develop/index.html#wire-format) to provide the schema ID and magic byte in the header of records.

@rockwotj check my exact math here please

+
[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create <subject-name> --schema </path-to-schema> --type <format>
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
SUBJECT                VERSION   ID   TYPE
new-topic-name-value   1         1    PROTOBUF
----
+
If you select `KEY_VALUE` for the topic Iceberg mode, Redpanda uses a simple schema consisting of the record’s key, value, and the original record timestamp. Consider this schemaless approach if you can use the data in a more semi-structured format.
+

> NOTE: Redpanda automatically adds three Kafka-related fields to the table it creates: the record timestamp, the partition it belongs to, and its offset.

Reviewer 3: @rockwotj  @kbatuigas what seems to be missing here 

- that we also always add the Key even when using VALUE_SCHEMA_ID_PREFIX mode
- that the key and metadata fields are added within a redpanda struct (show example)
- what's the struct situation in KEY_VALUE mode?

These all need a example to clarify.

As you produce records to the topic, the data also becomes available in object storage for consumption by Iceberg-compatible clients. 

== Consume data in Iceberg tables

You can use the same analytical tools to access table data in a data lake as you would for a relational database.

For example, suppose you produce the same stream of events to a topic `test_topic`, and another topic `test_topic_schemaless`. The topics have Tiered Storage configured to an AWS S3 bucket. A sample record contains the following data:

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
{'Topic': 'apple', 'Sentiment': 'positive', 'TweetId': '126377656416612353', 'TweetDate': 'Tue Oct 18 19:22:35 +0000 2011', 'TweetText': 'Great up close & personal event @Apple tonight in Regent St store!'}
----

When you point your Iceberg-compatible tool or framework to the object storage location of the Iceberg tables, how you consume the data depends on whether you've registered a schema on which to base the table format. In either approach, you do not need to rely on complex ETL jobs or pipelines to consume real-time data from Redpanda.

> === Structured approach with schema

Reviewer 3: Obviously some of these examples will be different now with the new schema/column handling and will need updating @kbatuigas @rockwotj

Reviewer 4: Yes happy to work with you @kbatuigas on this

* UINT32 and FIXED32 are translated into Iceberg LONG types as that is the existing semantic for unsigned 32bit values in Iceberg.
* UINT64 and FIXED64 values are translated into their base 10 string representation.
* Timestamp well known protos are translated into TIMESTAMP Iceberg types.
* Messages are converted into STRUCT types.
* Recursive types are not supported.
--
======

== Set up catalog integration

You can configure the Iceberg integration to either create a file in the same object storage bucket or container to serve as the catalog, or connect to a REST-based catalog. 

Set the cluster configuration property `iceberg_catalog_type` with one of the following values:

* `object_storage`: Write catalog files to the same object storage bucket as the data files. Use the object storage URL to access the catalog for your Redpanda Iceberg tables.
* `rest`: Connect to and update an Iceberg catalog hosted on a REST server.

For an Iceberg REST catalog, set the following additional cluster configuration properties:

* `iceberg_rest_catalog_endpoint`: The endpoint URL for your Iceberg catalog, which you are either managing directly, or is managed by an external catalog service.

> * `iceberg_rest_catalog_prefix`: Append a prefix to the catalog path, e.g. `/v1/{prefix}/namespaces`.

Reviewer: @mmaslankaprv is this property required to use the REST catalog? And `{prefix}` in the example is a placeholder for the value set for the property? Is `namespaces` a default or standard in catalog paths?

Reviewer 6: This property is optional, the `{prefix}` name is defined in catalog REST API spec: https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/main/open-api/rest-catalog-open-api.yaml. 

full address of `/namespaces` resource looks like this: 

```
<protocol_scheme>://<host_name>:<port>/<base_path>/v1/<prefix>/namespaces
```
The part: `<protocol_scheme>://<host_name>:<port>/<base_path>` is parsed out from `iceberg_rest_catalog_endpoint`

Prefix is an additional optional property

Reviewer: @mmaslankaprv in that case I think it might be better to not mention the property here as long as it's in the reference (we'll be pointing out that the full list of available catalog properties can be viewed there)

* `iceberg_rest_catalog_client_id`: The ID to connect to the REST server.
* `iceberg_rest_catalog_client_secret`: The secret data to connect to the REST server.

> 

Reviewer: @mmaslankaprv are the TLS configs required and do we need to call them out in this list too?

Reviewer 6: TLS properties are required if somebody is using a catalog that uses self signed certificate

// update xref when PR for extracted properties is ready
See xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc[Cluster Configuration Properties] for the full list of cluster properties to configure for a catalog integration.

> === Example catalog configuration

Reviewer: @rockwotj this is an attempt at a simple demonstration of how the catalog configs tie together, could you let me know if this is correct and helpful?

The Iceberg integration uses xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage]. When a cluster or topic has Tiered Storage enabled, Redpanda stores the Iceberg files in the configured Tiered Storage bucket or container.  

== Prerequisites

* Install `rpk`.

*  {empty}
include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]
+
To check if you already have a license key applied to your cluster:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster license info
----

* Enable xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc#set-up-tiered-storage[Tiered Storage] for the topics for which you want to generate Iceberg tables.

== Limitations

* It is not possible to append data from Redpanda topics to an existing Iceberg table.
* If you enable the Iceberg integration on an existing Redpanda topic, Redpanda does not backfill the generated Iceberg table with topic data.
* JSON schemas are not currently supported. For Avro schemas, records cannot contain fields greater than 128 KB.
* You can only use one schema per topic. Schema versioning as well as upcasting (where a value is cast into its more generic data type) are not supported. See <<schema-types-translation,Schema types translation>> for more details.

> * xref:manage:remote-read-replicas.adoc[Remote read replicas] and xref:manage:topic-recovery.adoc[topic recovery] are not supported for Iceberg-enabled topics.

Reviewer 4: Let's add a limitation saying: if using Avro or Protobuf data, in order to convert the data into an iceberg table, the Schema Registry Wire Format must be used.

Also we probably need a note about the Schema Registry Wire Format. The only thing I've seen close to it is the explanation here: https://docs.redpanda.com/current/manage/schema-reg/schema-id-validation/#about-schema-id-validation

Or maybe we point to our blog post that talks about this: https://www.redpanda.com/blog/schema-registry-kafka-streaming#how-does-serialization-work-with-schema-registry-in-kafka

> == Architecture 

Reviewer 4: This is not really architecture but an introduction to Apache Iceberg.

Apache Iceberg is an open source format specification for defining structured tables in a data lake. The table format lets you quickly and easily manage, query, and process huge amounts of structured and unstructured data. This is similar to the way in which you would manage and run SQL queries against relational data in a database or data warehouse. The open format lets you use many different languages, tools, and applications to process the same data in a consistent way, so you can avoid vendor lock-in. This data management system is referred to as a _data lakehouse_.

In the Iceberg specification, tables consist of the following layers:

* Data layer
** Data files: Store the data. The Iceberg integration currently supports the Parquet file format. Parquet files are column-based and suitable for analytical workloads at scale. They come with compression capabilities that optimize files for object storage. 

> * Metadata layer

Reviewer 4: Might be worthwhile to point out the benefits of this. It allows multiple writers to stage metadata changes, and also supports database snapshots and time-travelling queries that query the database at a previous point in time.

** Manifest list: Tracks all the manifest files belonging to a table, including file paths and upper and lower bounds for partition fields. 
** Metadata file: Stores metadata about the table, including its schema, partition information, and snapshots. Whenever a change is made to the table, a new metadata file is created and becomes the latest version of the metadata in the catalog.
--
+
In the Redpanda Iceberg integration, the manifest files are in JSON format.
* Catalog: Contains the current metadata pointer for the table. Clients reading and writing data to the table see the same version of the current state of the table. The Iceberg integration supports two <<set-up-catalog-integration,catalog integration>> types. You can configure Redpanda to catalog files stored in the same object storage bucket or container where the Iceberg data files are located, or you can configure Redpanda to use an https://iceberg.apache.org/concepts/catalog/#catalog-implementations[Iceberg REST catalog^] endpoint to update an externally-managed catalog when there are changes to the Iceberg data and metadata.

image::shared:iceberg-integration.png[]

> When you enable the Iceberg integration for a Redpanda topic, Redpanda brokers store streaming data in the Iceberg-compatible format in Parquet files in object storage. The brokers also write events to segment files stored on disk. Storing the streaming data in Iceberg tables in the cloud allows you to derive real-time insights through many compatible https://iceberg.apache.org/vendors/[data lakehouse, data engineering, and business intelligence tools]. 

Reviewer 4: This is maybe getting into Architecture a bit?

> When you enable the Iceberg integration for a Redpanda topic, Redpanda brokers store streaming data in the Iceberg-compatible format in Parquet files in object storage. The brokers also write events to segment files stored on disk. Storing the streaming data in Iceberg tables in the cloud allows you to derive real-time insights through many compatible https://iceberg.apache.org/vendors/[data lakehouse, data engineering, and business intelligence tools]. 

Reviewer 4: > The brokers also write events to segment files stored on disk.

This feels like it's wedged in here and I don't know if this statement is meaningful to an end user. Does the average end user know what a segment is? I think we're trying to say that the iceberg data is in addition to the current log oriented format that support normally and doesn't replace it.

== Enable Iceberg integration

To create an Iceberg table for a Redpanda topic, you must set the cluster configuration property `iceberg_enabled` to `true`, and also configure the topic property `redpanda.iceberg.mode`. You can choose to provide a schema if you need the Iceberg table to be structured with defined columns.

. Set the `iceberg_enabled` configuration option on your cluster to `true`. 
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set iceberg_enabled true 
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
Successfully updated configuration. New configuration version is 2.
----

. Create a new topic.
+
[,bash,]
----
rpk topic create <new-topic-name> --partitions 1 --replicas 1
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

. Enable the integration for the topic by configuring `redpanda.iceberg.mode`. You can choose one of the following modes:
+
--
* `key_value`: Creates an Iceberg table with a `Key` column and a `Value` column. Redpanda stores the raw topic content in the `Value` column. We also refer to this as the "schemaless" mode.

> * `value_schema_id_prefix`: Creates an Iceberg table whose structure matches the Redpanda schema for this topic, with columns corresponding to each field. Redpanda parses the topic values per field and stores them in the corresponding table columns. 

Reviewer 4: We need to link to some documentation about this requiring that producers write data using the schema ID wire format as I mentioned earlier.

* `disabled` (default): Disables writing to an Iceberg table for this topic.
--
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic alter-config <new-topic-name> --set redpanda.iceberg.mode=<topic-iceberg-mode>
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

> . Register a schema for the topic (optional). You must also set the `redpanda.iceberg.mode` topic property to `value_schema_id_prefix`.

Reviewer 4: This is backwards I think?

If using `redpanda.iceberg.mode=value_schema_id_prefix`, then you must have a schema registered in the schema registry.

+
[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create <subject-name> --schema </path-to-schema> --type <format>
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
SUBJECT                VERSION   ID   TYPE
new-topic-name-value   1         1    PROTOBUF
----
+

> If you don't use a schema for the topic, select `key_value` for the topic Iceberg mode. Redpanda uses a simple schema for the Iceberg table, consisting of a column that stores the record’s metadata, key, and value.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you don't use a schema for the topic, select `key_value` for the topic Iceberg mode. Redpanda uses a simple schema for the Iceberg table, consisting two columns, one for the record metadata and another binary column for the record's value.
```

> The Iceberg table name is the same as the Redpanda topic name. As you produce records to the topic, the data also becomes available in object storage for consumption by Iceberg-compatible clients. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Iceberg table name is the same as the Redpanda topic name, inside of a namespace called `redpanda`. As you produce records to the topic, the data also becomes available in object storage for consumption by Iceberg-compatible clients. 
```

== Schema support and mapping

> The `redpanda.iceberg.mode` property determines how Redpanda maps the topic data to the Iceberg table structure. You can either have the generated Iceberg table match the stucture of a Avro or Protobuf schema in the Schema Registry, or use the schemaless mode where Redpanda stores the record values as-is in the table. The JSON Schema format is not supported in this beta release. If your topic data is in JSON, it is recommended to use the `key_value` (schemaless) mode.

Reviewer 4: Can we not use `schemaless` terms in the public docs? I think `key_value` is more clear because there is still a schema in Iceberg.

=== Iceberg table modes

> For both `key_value` and `value_schema_id_prefix` modes, Redpanda writes to a `redpanda` table column that stores a single struct per record, containing nested columns of the metadata from each record, including the record timestamp, the partition it belongs to, and its offset. 

Reviewer 4: Also, key and record headers

> In the `key_value` ("schemaless") mode, the `redpanda` metadata structs also contain both the record key and value. If you are associating a schema with the topic using the `value_schema_id_prefix` mode, the `redpanda` structs contain the record key only. Redpanda uses the matching schema to define table columns based on schema fields and then maps the record values to the corresponding columns.

Reviewer 4: This is no longer the case (I'll update the demo) for key_value mode, there are two columns `redpanda` and `value`.

For example, if you produce to a topic according to the following Avro schema:

```
{
    "type": "record",
    "name": "ClickEvent",
    "fields": [
        {
            "name": "user_id",
            "type": "int"
        },
        {
            "name": "event_type",
            "type": "string"
        },
        {
            "name": "ts",
            "type": "string"
        }
    ]
}

```

The `key_value` mode writes to the following table format:

```
CREATE TABLE ClickEvent (
  redpanda OBJECT(
    partition INT,
    timestamp TIMESTAMP,
    offset    LONG,
    headers   ARRAY(OBJECT(KEY BINARY, VALUE BINARY NULLABLE)),
    key       BINARY NULLABLE,
    data      BINARY NULLABLE
  )

> )

Reviewer 6: This is no longer valid. `data` column is outside of `redpanda OBJECT`
```
CREATE TABLE ClickEvent (
  redpanda OBJECT(
    partition INT,
    timestamp TIMESTAMP,
    offset    LONG,
    headers   ARRAY(OBJECT(KEY BINARY, VALUE BINARY NULLABLE)),
    key       BINARY NULLABLE,
  ),
   data      BINARY NULLABLE
)
```

Reviewer 4: It's also called `value` instead of `data` (so it makes sense with `redpanda.iceberg.mode=key_value` topic property)

=== Schema types translation

[tabs]
======
Avro::
+
--
* Redpanda supports direct translations of the following Avro types to Iceberg value domains:
** boolean
** int
** long
** float
** double
** bytes 
** string
** record
** array
** maps
** fixed
** decimal
** uuid
** date
** time
** timestamp
* Different flavors of timestamp and time types are all represented by the same Iceberg type, conversion will be done.
* Avro unions are flattened to structs with optional fields, out of which only one is present, or none in case there is a field with null type:
** For example, the union `["int", "long", "float"]` is represented as an Iceberg struct `OBJECT(0 INT NULLABLE, 1 LONG  NULLABLE, 2 FLOAT NULLABLE)`.
** The union `["int", null, "float"]` is represented as an Iceberg struct `OBJECT(0 INT NULLABLE, 1 FLOAT NULLABLE)`.
* All fields are required by default (Avro always sets a default in binary representation).
* Duration logical type is ignored.
* Null type is ignored and not represented in Iceberg schema.

> * Recursive types are not supported.

Reviewer 4: It's probably going to be easier for people to grok this as a table of

| Avro Type | Iceberg Type |
|--------|--------|
| Long | Long |
| Float | Float |
| Bytes | Bytes |

With notes at the bottom talking about unions, timestamps, time, nulls, recursive types, etc.

Something like this for inspiration: https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.11.1/specification/#schema-record

--

Protobuf::
+
--

> * Redpanda supports direct translations of the following Avro types to Iceberg value domains: 

Reviewer 4: Same goes for above about the table and adding the notes below. Here is an example for inspiration: https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/proto3/#scalar

** BOOL
** DOUBLE
** FLOAT
** INT32
** SINT32
** INT64
** SINT64
** SFIXED32
** SFIXED64
** STRING
** BYTES
** MAP
* Repeated values are translated into Iceberg ARRAY types.
* Enums are translated into Iceberg INT types based on the integer value of the enumerated type.
* UINT32 and FIXED32 are translated into Iceberg LONG types as that is the existing semantic for unsigned 32bit values in Iceberg.
* UINT64 and FIXED64 values are translated into their base 10 string representation.
* Timestamp well known protos are translated into TIMESTAMP Iceberg types.
* Messages are converted into STRUCT types.
* Recursive types are not supported.
--
======

== Set up catalog integration

You can configure the Iceberg integration to either create a file in the same object storage bucket or container to serve as the catalog, or connect to a REST-based catalog. 

Set the cluster configuration property `iceberg_catalog_type` with one of the following values:

> * `object_storage`: Write catalog files to the same object storage bucket as the data files. Use the object storage URL to access the catalog for your Redpanda Iceberg tables.

Reviewer: @mattschumpert is there anything specific we should explain or convey about the object storage option for the catalog type? I'm trying to include a simple explanation on the REST option later in this section too, not sure if we should also expand on the object storage type further.

Reviewer 3: I would say 'Use the object storage URL with an Iceberg client to access the catalog and data files' or something like this.

The point is that iceberg clients must know the specific file location of the table in cloud storage and provide the URL directly when reading the table.

Providing an example here  via Spar would be great.

Reviewer 3: @rockwotj FYI

Reviewer 4: Yeah it's very clunky. We should recommend using the catalog. TBH I can't find an example of how to point spark to a metadata file very easily

> * `object_storage`: Write catalog files to the same object storage bucket as the data files. Use the object storage URL to access the catalog for your Redpanda Iceberg tables.

Reviewer 6: I think we should mention here it is not intended for production uses cases (at least for now)

> * `rest`: Connect to and update an Iceberg catalog hosted on a REST server.

Reviewer 6: Connect to and update an Iceberg catalog via REST API.

* `iceberg_rest_catalog_endpoint`: The endpoint URL for your Iceberg catalog, which you are either managing directly, or is managed by an external catalog service.
* `iceberg_rest_catalog_prefix`: Append a prefix to the catalog path, e.g. `/v1/{prefix}/namespaces`.
* `iceberg_rest_catalog_client_id`: The ID to connect to the REST server.
* `iceberg_rest_catalog_client_secret`: The secret data to connect to the REST server.

// update xref when PR for extracted properties is ready
See xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc[Cluster Configuration Properties] for the full list of cluster properties to configure for a catalog integration.

=== Example REST catalog configuration

You'll be able to use to the catalog to load, query, or refresh the Iceberg data as you produce to the Redpanda topic. Refer to the official documentation of your query engine or Iceberg-compatible tool for guidance on integrating the REST-based catalog. 

For example, if you have Redpanda cluster configuration properties set to connect to a REST catalog named `demo`:

```
iceberg_rest_catalog_type: rest 
iceberg_rest_catalog_endpoint: http://catalog-service:8181 

> iceberg_rest_catalog_client_id: <rest-connection-id>

Reviewer 4: replace ID with user?

iceberg_rest_catalog_client_secret: <rest-connection-password>
```

> And you have a Spark configured to use the `demo` catalog:

Reviewer 4: Maybe use `streaming` or `lakehouse` as the catalog name?

```
spark.sql.catalog.demo = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.demo.type = rest
spark.sql.catalog.demo.uri = http://catalog-service:8181
spark.sql.catalog.demo.warehouse = s3://redpanda/
```

Using Spark SQL, you can query the Iceberg table directly by specifying the catalog name:

> ```

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```sql
```

Reviewer 7: or consider using 
```
[,sql]
----
```

instead

=== Structured approach with schema

Register the following schema for `ClickEvent` under the `ClickEvent-value` subject:

[,avro]
----
{
    "type" : "record",
    "namespace" : "com.redpanda.examples.avro",
    "name" : "ClickEvent",
    "fields" : [
       { "name": "user_id", "type" : "int" },
       { "name": "event_type", "type" : "string" },
       { "name": "ts", "type": "string" }
    ]
 }
----

[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create ClickEvent-value --schema path/to/schema.avsc --type avro
----

Query engines such as Spark SQL provide Iceberg integrations to allow easy access to existing Iceberg tables in object storage. The table structure is derived from the schema. In this example, the query returns values from columns in the `ClickEvent` table, with the column names matching the schema fields:

[,sql]
----
SELECT user_id, 
  event_type, 
  ts 
FROM ClickEvent;
----

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
| user_id | event_type   | ts                       |
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
| 2324    | BUTTON_CLICK | 2024-11-25T20:23:59.380Z |
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
----

> === Schemaless approach

Reviewer 4: Can we call this `key_value` instead?

You can also forgo using a schema, which means using semi-structured data in Iceberg. 

This example queries the semi-structured data in the `ClickEvent_schemaless` table, which consists of a column `redpanda` containing the record key, value, and metadata:

[,sql]
----
SELECT 
  redpanda.data
FROM ClickEvent_schemaless;
----

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

> | redpanda.data                                                                |

Reviewer 4: This will be just `value` in the latest version

+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| {"user_id":2324,"event_type":"BUTTON_CLICK","ts":"2024-11-25T20:23:59.380Z"} |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
----

> == Suggested reading

Reviewer 4: When the beta offically launches I'll add a lab example of the docker compose I have now, so we can also link to that.

Reviewer 3: @kbatuigas  we need to make it clear that this example assumes use of the REST catalog type and that the table metadata has been transferred to the external catalog.  Otherwise this example will not work without a CREATE TABLE

Reviewer 4: Not true - the create table think is only for pointing at direct iceberg tables. I believe the object storage catalog uses the hadoop catalog format, so you can still point spark/trino to the metadata and it can auto discover tables from the "catalog"

Reviewer 4: I think @andrwng or @bharathv can correct me or clarify

Reviewer 8: Correct.

= Iceberg Topics
:description: Learn how to integrate Redpanda topics with Apache Iceberg.
:page-context-links: [{"name": "Linux", "to": "manage:topic-iceberg-integration.adoc" } ]
:page-categories: Management, High Availability, Data Replication, Integration
:page-beta: true

The Apache Iceberg integration for Redpanda allows you to store topic data in the cloud in the Iceberg open table format. This makes your streaming data immediately available for analytical systems, such as data warehouses like RedShift, Snowflake, and Clickhouse, and big data processing platforms, such as Apache Spark and Flink, without setting up and maintaining additional ETL pipelines. 

The Iceberg integration uses xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage]. When a cluster or topic has Tiered Storage enabled, Redpanda stores the Iceberg files in the configured Tiered Storage bucket or container.  

== Prerequisites

* Install xref:get-started:rpk-install.adoc[`rpk`].

*  {empty}

> include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]

Reviewer: @mattschumpert Would you please also double check how this license info shows up in the preview? https://deploy-preview-800--redpanda-docs-preview.netlify.app/24.3/manage/topic-iceberg-integration/#prerequisites Want to confirm that what we're saying here is in line with our licensing updates.

Reviewer 9: It depends on whether the license is valid/about to expire.

This would be an example of a valid one:

```
LICENSE INFORMATION
===================
License status:              valid
License violation:           false
Enterprise features in use:  [partition_auto_balancing_continuous]
Organization:                Devex
Type:                        enterprise
Expires:                     Oct 11 2025
```

Reviewer 3: @kbatuigas the preview content about licensing looks good, but the 'contact sales' link should go here: https://www.redpanda.com/upgrade

* `disabled` (default): Disables writing to an Iceberg table for this topic.
--
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic alter-config <new-topic-name> --set redpanda.iceberg.mode=<topic-iceberg-mode>
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

. Register a schema for the topic. This step is required for the `value_schema_id_prefix` mode, but is optional otherwise.
+
[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create <subject-name> --schema </path-to-schema> --type <format>
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
SUBJECT                VERSION   ID   TYPE
new-topic-name-value   1         1    PROTOBUF
----

The Iceberg table is inside a namespace called `redpanda`, and has the same name as the Redpanda topic name. As you produce records to the topic, the data also becomes available in object storage for consumption by Iceberg-compatible clients. 

== Schema support and mapping

> The `redpanda.iceberg.mode` property determines how Redpanda maps the topic data to the Iceberg table structure. You can either have the generated Iceberg table match the stucture of a Avro or Protobuf schema in the Schema Registry, or use the schemaless mode where Redpanda stores the record values as-is in the table. 

Reviewer 4: Can we remove the usage of `schemaless` every where?

=== Iceberg modes and table schemas

For both `key_value` and `value_schema_id_prefix` modes, Redpanda writes to a `redpanda` table column that stores a single Iceberg struct per record, containing nested columns of the metadata from each record, including the record key, headers, timestamp, the partition it belongs to, and its offset. 

For example, if you produce to a topic according to the following Avro schema:

[,avro]
----
{
    "type": "record",
    "name": "ClickEvent",
    "fields": [
        {
            "name": "user_id",
            "type": "int"
        },
        {
            "name": "event_type",
            "type": "string"
        },
        {
            "name": "ts",
            "type": "string"
        }
    ]
}
----

The `key_value` mode writes to the following table format:

[,sql]
----
CREATE TABLE ClickEvent ( 
    redpanda OBJECT( 
        partition INT, 
        timestamp TIMESTAMP, 
        offset LONG, 
        headers ARRAY(OBJECT(KEY BINARY, VALUE BINARY NULLABLE)), 
        key BINARY NULLABLE
    ), 
    value BINARY NULLABLE

> )

Reviewer 4: So this is Snowflake format. We should probably use the spark format:

```suggestion
CREATE TABLE ClickEvent (
    redpanda struct<
        partition: integer NOT NULL,
        timestamp: timestamp NOT NULL,
        offset:    long NOT NULL,
        headers:   array<struct<key: binary NOT NULL, value: binary>>,
        key:       binary
    >,
    value binary
)
```

----

Consider this schemaless approach if the topic data is in JSON, or if you can use the Iceberg data in its semi-structured format.

The `value_schema_id_prefix` mode translates to the following table format:

[,sql]
----
CREATE TABLE ClickEvent (
    redpanda OBJECT(
        partition INT,
        timestamp TIMESTAMP,
        offset    LONG,
        headers   ARRAY(OBJECT(KEY BINARY, VALUE BINARY NULLABLE)),
        key       BINARY NULLABLE
    ),
    user_id INT,
    event_type STRING NULLABLE,
    ts STRING NULLABLE

> )

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
CREATE TABLE ClickEvent (
    redpanda struct<
        partition: integer NOT NULL,
        timestamp: timestamp NOT NULL,
        offset:    long NOT NULL,
        headers:   array<struct<key: binary NOT NULL, value: binary>>,
        key:       binary
    >,
    user_id integer NOT NULL,
    event_type string,
    ts string
)
```

----

With schema integration, Redpanda uses the schema ID prefix embedded in each record to find the matching schema in the Schema Registry. Producers to the topic must use the schema ID prefix in the serialization process so Redpanda can determine the schema used for each record, parse the record according to that schema, and use the schema for the Iceberg table as well.

=== Schema types translation

Redpanda supports direct translations of the following types to Iceberg value domains:

> [tabs]

Reviewer: @rockwotj is this closer to what you had in mind? Also, please double check the tables -- especially Avro `fixed` which I couldn't quite figure out what the Iceberg equivalent would be

Reviewer 4: Iceberg has a `fixed` type too

======
Avro::
+
--
|===
| Avro type | Iceberg type

| boolean | boolean
| int | int
| long | long
| float | float
| double | double
| bytes | binary
| string | string
| record | struct
| array | list
| maps | list
| fixed | 
| decimal | decimal
| uuid | uuid
| date | date
| time | time
| timestamp | timestamp
|===

* Different flavors of time (such as time-millis) and timestamp (such as timestamp-millis) types are translated to the same Iceberg `time` and `timestamp` types respectively.
* Avro unions are flattened to Iceberg structs with optional fields:
** For example, the union `["int", "long", "float"]` is represented as an Iceberg struct `OBJECT(0 INT NULLABLE, 1 LONG  NULLABLE, 2 FLOAT NULLABLE)`.

> ** The union `["int", null, "float"]` is represented as an Iceberg struct `OBJECT(0 INT NULLABLE, 1 FLOAT NULLABLE)`.

Reviewer 4: Can we update `OBJECT` to spark SQL form `struct<>`

* All fields are required by default (Avro always sets a default in binary representation).
* The Avro duration logical type is ignored.
* The Avro null type is ignored and not represented in the Iceberg schema.
* Recursive types are not supported.
--

Protobuf::
+
--

|===
| Protobuf type | Iceberg type

| bool | boolean
| double | double
| float | float
| int32 | int
| sint32 | int
| int64 | long
| sint64 | long
| sfixed32 | int
| sfixed64 | int
| string | string
| bytes | binary

> | map | list

Reviewer 4: map -> map

[,yaml]
----
iceberg_rest_catalog_type: rest 
iceberg_rest_catalog_endpoint: http://catalog-service:8181 
iceberg_rest_catalog_client_id: <rest-connection-user>
iceberg_rest_catalog_client_secret: <rest-connection-password>
----

And you use Spark as a processing engine, configured to use the `streaming` catalog:

```
spark.sql.catalog.streaming = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.streaming.type = rest
spark.sql.catalog.streaming.uri = http://catalog-service:8181
spark.sql.catalog.streaming.warehouse = s3://redpanda/
```

Using Spark SQL, you can query the Iceberg table directly by specifying the catalog name:

[,sql]
----
SELECT * FROM streaming.redpanda.ClickEvent;
----

Using a REST catalog enables Spark to automatically discover the topic's Iceberg table. If using the object storage catalog type, you may have to explicitly create a new table and load the Iceberg data in your processing engine. 

== Access data in Iceberg tables

You can use the same analytical tools to access table data in a data lake as you would for a relational database.

> For example, suppose you produce the same stream of events to a topic `ClickEvent`, and another topic `ClickEvent_schemaless`. The topics have Tiered Storage configured to an AWS S3 bucket. A sample record contains the following data:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, suppose you produce the same stream of events to a topic `ClickEvent`, and another topic `ClickEvent_key_value`. The topics have Tiered Storage configured to an AWS S3 bucket. A sample record contains the following data:
```

       { "name": "event_type", "type" : "string" },
       { "name": "ts", "type": "string" }
    ]
 }
----

With `redpanda.iceberg.mode` set to `value_schema_id_prefix`, you can register the schema under the `ClickEvent-value` subject:

[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create ClickEvent-value --schema path/to/schema.avsc --type avro
----

Processing engines such as Spark SQL provide Iceberg integrations to allow easy access to existing Iceberg tables in object storage. The table structure is derived from the schema. In this example, this Spark SQL query returns values from columns in the `ClickEvent` table, with the column names matching the schema fields:

[,sql]
----
SELECT user_id, 
    event_type, 
    ts 
FROM ClickEvent;
----

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
| user_id | event_type   | ts                       |
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
| 2324    | BUTTON_CLICK | 2024-11-25T20:23:59.380Z |
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
----

=== Query topic in key-value mode

You can also forgo using a schema, which means using semi-structured data in Iceberg. 

> This example queries the semi-structured data in the `ClickEvent_schemaless` table, which also consists of another column `redpanda` containing the record key and other metadata:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This example queries the semi-structured data in the `ClickEvent_key_value` table, which also consists of another column `redpanda` containing the record key and other metadata:
```

[,sql]
----
SELECT 
    value

> FROM ClickEvent_schemaless;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
FROM ClickEvent_key_value;
```

----

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

> | redpanda.value                                                               |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| value                                                               |
```

= Iceberg Topics
:description: Learn how to integrate Redpanda topics with Apache Iceberg.
:page-context-links: [{"name": "Linux", "to": "manage:topic-iceberg-integration.adoc" } ]
:page-categories: Management, High Availability, Data Replication, Integration
:page-beta: true

> The Apache Iceberg integration for Redpanda allows you to store topic data in the cloud in the Iceberg open table format. This makes your streaming data immediately available for analytical systems, such as data warehouses like RedShift, Snowflake, and Clickhouse, and big data processing platforms, such as Apache Spark and Flink, without setting up and maintaining additional ETL pipelines. 

Reviewer 3: Redshift (no capital 'S')

let's also add Databricks, e.g

"This makes your streaming data immediately available in downstream analytical systems, including cloud data warehouses/lakehouses such as Snowflake, Databricks, Clickhouse and Redshift, without setting up additional ETL pipelines.  Direct integration to Iceberg tables is also provided in commonly used big data processing frameworks, such as Apache Spark and Flink, standardizing and simplifying the consumption of streams as tables in a wide variety of data analytics pipelines.

The Iceberg integration uses xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage]. When a cluster or topic has Tiered Storage enabled, Redpanda stores the Iceberg files in the configured Tiered Storage bucket or container.  

== Prerequisites

* Install xref:get-started:rpk-install.adoc[`rpk`].

*  {empty}
include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]
+
To check if you already have a license key applied to your cluster:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster license info
----

* Enable xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc#set-up-tiered-storage[Tiered Storage] for the topics for which you want to generate Iceberg tables.

== Limitations

> * It is not possible to append data from Redpanda topics to an existing Iceberg table.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should clarify that 'The table must be created by Redpanda'.  

I say this because it could create a slight confusion in that we do lots of appending of data into existing tables after WE create the table

* If you enable the Iceberg integration on an existing Redpanda topic, Redpanda does not backfill the generated Iceberg table with topic data.
* JSON schemas are not currently supported. If the topic data is in JSON, use the `key_value` mode to store the JSON in Iceberg, which then can be parsed by most query engines.

> * If using Avro or Protobuf data, you must use the Schema Registry wire format, where producers include the magic byte and schema ID in the message payload header. See also: xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-id-validation.adoc[] and the https://www.redpanda.com/blog/schema-registry-kafka-streaming#how-does-serialization-work-with-schema-registry-in-kafka[Understanding Apache Kafka Schema Registry^] blog post.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* If you are using Avro or Protobuf data, you must use the Schema Registry wire format, where producers include the magic byte and schema ID in the message payload header. See also: xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-id-validation.adoc[] and the https://www.redpanda.com/blog/schema-registry-kafka-streaming#how-does-serialization-work-with-schema-registry-in-kafka[Understanding Apache Kafka Schema Registry^] blog post.
```

** Manifest list: Tracks all the manifest files belonging to a table, including file paths and upper and lower bounds for partition fields. 
** Metadata file: Stores metadata about the table, including its schema, partition information, and snapshots. Whenever a change is made to the table, a new metadata file is created and becomes the latest version of the metadata in the catalog.
--
+
In the Redpanda Iceberg integration, the manifest files are in JSON format.
* Catalog: Contains the current metadata pointer for the table. Clients reading and writing data to the table see the same version of the current state of the table. The Iceberg integration supports two <<set-up-catalog-integration,catalog integration>> types. You can configure Redpanda to catalog files stored in the same object storage bucket or container where the Iceberg data files are located, or you can configure Redpanda to use an https://iceberg.apache.org/concepts/catalog/#decoupling-using-the-rest-catalog[Iceberg REST catalog^] endpoint to update an externally-managed catalog when there are changes to the Iceberg data and metadata.

image::shared:iceberg-integration.png[]

> When you enable the Iceberg integration for a Redpanda topic, Redpanda brokers store streaming data in the Iceberg-compatible format in Parquet files in object storage, in addition to the log segments uploaded via Tiered Storage. Storing the streaming data in Iceberg tables in the cloud allows you to derive real-time insights through many compatible data lakehouse, data engineering, and business intelligence https://iceberg.apache.org/vendors/[tools^]. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When you enable the Iceberg integration for a Redpanda topic, Redpanda brokers store streaming data in the Iceberg-compatible format in Parquet files in object storage, in addition to the log segments uploaded using Tiered Storage. Storing the streaming data in Iceberg tables in the cloud allows you to derive real-time insights through many compatible data lakehouse, data engineering, and business intelligence https://iceberg.apache.org/vendors/[tools^]. 
```

== Enable Iceberg integration

To create an Iceberg table for a Redpanda topic, you must set the cluster configuration property `iceberg_enabled` to `true`, and also configure the topic property `redpanda.iceberg.mode`. You can choose to provide a schema if you need the Iceberg table to be structured with defined columns.

. Set the `iceberg_enabled` configuration option on your cluster to `true`. 
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set iceberg_enabled true 
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----

> Successfully updated configuration. New configuration version is 2.

Reviewer 4: This also requires a restart

----

. Create a new topic.
+
[,bash,]
----
rpk topic create <new-topic-name> --partitions 1 --replicas 1
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

. Enable the integration for the topic by configuring `redpanda.iceberg.mode`. You can choose one of the following modes:
+
--

> * `key_value`: Creates an Iceberg table using a simple schema, consisting two columns, one for the record metadata including the key, and another binary column for the record's value.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* `key_value`: Creates an Iceberg table using a simple schema, consisting of two columns, one for the record metadata including the key, and another binary column for the record's value.
```

> * `value_schema_id_prefix`: Creates an Iceberg table whose structure matches the Redpanda schema for this topic, with columns corresponding to each field. Requires that you register a schema in the Schema Registry (see next step), and that producers write to the topic using the Schema Registry wire format. Redpanda parses the schema used by the record based on the schema ID encoded in the payload header, and stores the topic values in the corresponding table columns. 

Reviewer 5: The 'Requires that....` line gives a sentence fragment. Maybe you could reword to say something like.

You must register a ......and producers must write to the topic using the Schema Registry wire format.

* `disabled` (default): Disables writing to an Iceberg table for this topic.
--
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic alter-config <new-topic-name> --set redpanda.iceberg.mode=<topic-iceberg-mode>
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

. Register a schema for the topic. This step is required for the `value_schema_id_prefix` mode, but is optional otherwise.
+
[,bash]
----

> rpk registry schema create <subject-name> --schema </path-to-schema> --type <format>

Reviewer 3: @kbatuigas @rockwotj shouldn't we at least mention the Subject Naming Strategy here?   Ensuring it is set to TopicNamingStrategy  for your schemas is a requirement for this mode to work.  It is I believe the default, but we should at least explain that this is leveraged by Redpanda to map the schema to the 'value' of records in a particular topic.

Reviewer 4: We don't actually care at all about what you name your schema, but out of the non custom options in the Java Kafka Client, yes we only support TopicNamingStrategy (which is the default). I don't think it's worth mentioning - most people don't understand this at all - it's Java Client specific and if you understand this concept you'll understand you need topics with a single schema in it for this integration

----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
SUBJECT                VERSION   ID   TYPE
new-topic-name-value   1         1    PROTOBUF
----

> The Iceberg table is inside a namespace called `redpanda`, and has the same name as the Redpanda topic name. As you produce records to the topic, the data also becomes available in object storage for consumption by Iceberg-compatible clients. 

Reviewer 3: @rockwotj I guess adding tables into an existing namespace is something we may want to do in the future....

Reviewer 4: I like the custom namespace - makes it more clear we are the only supported writers

== Schema support and mapping

The `redpanda.iceberg.mode` property determines how Redpanda maps the topic data to the Iceberg table structure. You can either have the generated Iceberg table match the stucture of a Avro or Protobuf schema in the Schema Registry, or use the `key_value` mode where Redpanda stores the record values as-is in the table. 

The JSON Schema format is not supported in this beta release. If your topic data is in JSON, it is recommended to use the `key_value` mode.

=== Iceberg modes and table schemas

> For both `key_value` and `value_schema_id_prefix` modes, Redpanda writes to a `redpanda` table column that stores a single Iceberg struct per record, containing nested columns of the metadata from each record, including the record key, headers, timestamp, the partition it belongs to, and its offset. 

Reviewer 5: Does struct need a glossary entry?

Reviewer: @asimms41 not super sure as it's an Iceberg type, but I can certainly add a link to the Iceberg doc.

[,sql]
----
CREATE TABLE ClickEvent (
    redpanda struct<
        partition: integer NOT NULL,
        timestamp: timestamp NOT NULL,
        offset:    long NOT NULL,
        headers:   array<struct<key: binary NOT NULL, value: binary>>,
        key:       binary
    >,
    user_id integer NOT NULL,
    event_type string,
    ts string
)
----

With schema integration, Redpanda uses the schema ID prefix embedded in each record to find the matching schema in the Schema Registry. Producers to the topic must use the schema ID prefix in the serialization process so Redpanda can determine the schema used for each record, parse the record according to that schema, and use the schema for the Iceberg table as well.

=== Schema types translation

Redpanda supports direct translations of the following types to Iceberg value domains:

[tabs]
======
Avro::
+
--
|===
| Avro type | Iceberg type

| boolean | boolean
| int | int
| long | long
| float | float
| double | double
| bytes | binary
| string | string
| record | struct
| array | list
| maps | list
| fixed | fixed
| decimal | decimal
| uuid | uuid
| date | date
| time | time
| timestamp | timestamp
|===

> * Different flavors of time (such as time-millis) and timestamp (such as timestamp-millis) types are translated to the same Iceberg `time` and `timestamp` types respectively.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Different flavors of time (such as `time-millis`) and timestamp (such as `timestamp-millis`) types are translated to the same Iceberg `time` and `timestamp` types respectively.
```
Maybe these should be in backticks?

* All fields are required by default (Avro always sets a default in binary representation).
* The Avro duration logical type is ignored.
* The Avro null type is ignored and not represented in the Iceberg schema.
* Recursive types are not supported.
--

Protobuf::
+
--
|===
| Protobuf type | Iceberg type

| bool | boolean
| double | double
| float | float
| int32 | int
| sint32 | int
| int64 | long
| sint64 | long
| sfixed32 | int
| sfixed64 | int
| string | string
| bytes | binary
| map | map
|===

* Repeated values are translated into Iceberg `array` types.
* Enums are translated into Iceberg `int` types based on the integer value of the enumerated type.
* uint32 and fixed32 are translated into Iceberg `long` types as that is the existing semantic for unsigned 32-bit values in Iceberg.
* uint64 and fixed64 values are translated into their Base-10 string representation.
* The timestamp well-known type in Protobuf is translated into `timestamp` in Iceberg.
* Messages are converted into Iceberg structs.
* Recursive types are not supported.
--
======

== Set up catalog integration

> You can configure the Iceberg integration to either create a file in the same object storage bucket or container to serve as the catalog, or connect to a REST-based catalog. 

Reviewer 8: > create a file in the same object

this is a bit ambiguous .. I'd rephrase to something like

"... to either store the metadata in HadoopCatalog [format](https://iceberg.apache.org/javadoc/1.5.0/org/apache/iceberg/hadoop/HadoopCatalog.html) in the cloud bucket ...."

Set the cluster configuration property `iceberg_catalog_type` with one of the following values:

> * `rest`: Connect to and update an Iceberg catalog via REST API. See the https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/main/open-api/rest-catalog-open-api.yaml[Iceberg REST Catalog API specification].

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* `rest`: Connect to and update an Iceberg catalog using the REST API. See the https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/main/open-api/rest-catalog-open-api.yaml[Iceberg REST Catalog API specification].
```

> * `rest`: Connect to and update an Iceberg catalog using a REST API. See the https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/main/open-api/rest-catalog-open-api.yaml[Iceberg REST Catalog API specification].

Reviewer 3: @rockwotj @bharathv @andrwng 

Shouldn't we point out though that even with the external REST catalog approach , the external catalog still ultimately writes table catalog and metadata files into the Tiered Storage bucket/container.  So tables can still be accessed directly through the object storage filesystem OR via the external catalog.

cc @kbatuigas

Reviewer 4: I don't know if this is true - I am pretty sure that catalogs can write metadata anywhere they please - like a SQL DB

This is only for the top level metadata, we still write metadata and all the files for snapshots in object storage so you can still point directly to one of those in the engines that support it

Reviewer 8: Thats true.

> the external catalog still ultimately writes table catalog and metadata files into the Tiered Storage bucket/container. So tables can still be accessed directly through the object storage filesystem OR via the external catalog.

[this has been discussed in the google doc but just want to point out]
even though REST implementations do seem to write to the bucket, these catalogs implementations are not interoperable. Meaning we cannot just point spark/trino to the "bucket" written by a REST catalog expect things to work.

* `object_storage`: Write catalog files to the same object storage bucket as the data files. Use the object storage URL with an Iceberg client to access the catalog and data files for your Redpanda Iceberg tables.
+

> This option is not recommended for production use cases. Many catalog services such as https://docs.databricks.com/en/data-governance/unity-catalog/index.html[Databricks Unity^] and https://github.com/apache/polaris[Apache Polaris^] provide Iceberg REST endpoints to simplify your data lakehouse management.

Reviewer 3: @kbatuigas @rockwotj @andrwng @bharathv   I think we should soften this stance.  Many integration options /environments will not provide a REST option (there will be no rest catalog).

I think it's more like, "Where possible, we recommend the use of a REST-enabled Iceberg catalog such as Tabular, Databricks Unity or Apache Polaris/Snowflake in conjunction with the 'rest' iceberg catalog type in Redpanda"

Reviewer 3: cc @mmaslankaprv

Reviewer 4: I am fine with this

Reviewer 8: Makes sense but I think we should explicitly mention that we do not support switching catalog types. Eg: running with object_storage for a few days and then using a REST service without any migration step will result in loss of all committed table updates so far.

=== Example catalog integration

You'll be able to use to the catalog to load, query, or refresh the Iceberg data as you produce to the Redpanda topic. Refer to the official documentation of your query engine or Iceberg-compatible tool for guidance on integrating your Iceberg catalog. 

==== REST catalog 

For example, if you have Redpanda cluster configuration properties set to connect to a REST catalog named `streaming`:

[,yaml]
----
iceberg_rest_catalog_type: rest 
iceberg_rest_catalog_endpoint: http://catalog-service:8181 
iceberg_rest_catalog_client_id: <rest-connection-user>
iceberg_rest_catalog_client_secret: <rest-connection-password>
----

And you use Spark as a processing engine, configured to use the `streaming` catalog:

```
spark.sql.catalog.streaming = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.streaming.type = rest
spark.sql.catalog.streaming.uri = http://catalog-service:8181
```

Using Spark SQL, you can query the Iceberg table directly by specifying the catalog name:

[,sql]
----
SELECT * FROM streaming.redpanda.ClickEvent;
----

Spark can use the REST catalog to automatically discover the topic's Iceberg table. 

> ==== Filesystem-based catalog (`object_storage`)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
==== File system-based catalog (`object_storage`)
```
Just a suggestion.

> If using the `object_storage` catalog type, you must set up the catalog integration in your processing engine accordingly. For example, you can configure Spark to use a filesystem-based catalog with at least the following properties:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If you are using the `object_storage` catalog type, you must set up the catalog integration in your processing engine accordingly. For example, you can configure Spark to use a file system-based catalog with at least the following properties:
```

```
spark.sql.catalog.streaming.type = hadoop

> spark.sql.catalog.hadoop_prod.warehouse = s3a://<bucket-name>/path/to/redpanda-iceberg-table

Reviewer 8: @kbatuigas I believe this is where you need to plug the additional configs I DM-ed you.

In either mode, you do not need to rely on complex ETL jobs or pipelines to access real-time data from Redpanda in your data lakehouse.

=== Query topic with schema (`value_schema_id_prefix` mode)

In this example, it is assumed you have created the `ClickEvent` topic and set `redpanda.iceberg.mode` to `value_schema_id_prefix`. The following is an Avro schema for `ClickEvent`:

.`schema.avsc`
[,avro]
----
{
    "type" : "record",
    "namespace" : "com.redpanda.examples.avro",
    "name" : "ClickEvent",
    "fields" : [
       { "name": "user_id", "type" : "int" },
       { "name": "event_type", "type" : "string" },
       { "name": "ts", "type": "string" }
    ]
 }
----

You can register the schema under the `ClickEvent-value` subject:

[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create ClickEvent-value --schema path/to/schema.avsc --type avro
----

> If you produce to the `ClickEvent` topic in the following format:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can then produce to the `ClickEvent` topic using the following format:
```
I'm not sure about this but the lead in sentence doesn't seem flow from the previous step.

[,bash]
----
echo '"key1" {"user_id":2324,"event_type":"BUTTON_CLICK","ts":"2024-11-25T20:23:59.380Z"}' | rpk topic produce ClickEvent --format='%k %v\n' --schema-id=topic
----

The following SQL query returns values from columns in the `ClickEvent` table, with the table structure derived from the schema, and column names matching the schema fields. If you've integrated a catalog, query engines such as Spark SQL provide Iceberg integrations that allow easy discovery and access to existing Iceberg tables in object storage.

[,sql]
----
SELECT user_id, 
    event_type, 
    ts 
FROM <catalog-name>.ClickEvent;
----

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
| user_id | event_type   | ts                       |
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
| 2324    | BUTTON_CLICK | 2024-11-25T20:23:59.380Z |
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
----

=== Query topic in key-value mode

You can also forgo using a schema, which means using semi-structured data in Iceberg. 

> If you produce to the `ClickEvent_key_value` topic in the following format:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can produce to the `ClickEvent_key_value` topic using the following format:
```

The Iceberg integration uses xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage]. When a cluster or topic has Tiered Storage enabled, Redpanda stores the Iceberg files in the configured Tiered Storage bucket or container.  

== Prerequisites

* Install xref:get-started:rpk-install.adoc[`rpk`].

*  {empty}
include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]
+
To check if you already have a license key applied to your cluster:
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster license info
----

* Enable xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc#set-up-tiered-storage[Tiered Storage] for the topics for which you want to generate Iceberg tables.

== Limitations

* It is not possible to append topic data to an existing Iceberg table that is not created by Redpanda.
* If you enable the Iceberg integration on an existing Redpanda topic, Redpanda does not backfill the generated Iceberg table with topic data.
* JSON schemas are not currently supported. If the topic data is in JSON, use the `key_value` mode to store the JSON in Iceberg, which then can be parsed by most query engines.

> * If you are using Avro or Protobuf data, you must use the Schema Registry wire format, where producers include the magic byte and schema ID in the message payload header. See also: xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-id-validation.adoc[] and the https://www.redpanda.com/blog/schema-registry-kafka-streaming#how-does-serialization-work-with-schema-registry-in-kafka[Understanding Apache Kafka Schema Registry^] blog post.

Reviewer 7: which Schema Registry? Redpanda or any? Does it make a difference?

Reviewer: @rockwotj could you clarify here as well please?

Reviewer 4: only the built in one to Redpanda. External registries are not supported

* Catalog: Contains the current metadata pointer for the table. Clients reading and writing data to the table see the same version of the current state of the table. The Iceberg integration supports two <<set-up-catalog-integration,catalog integration>> types. You can configure Redpanda to catalog files stored in the same object storage bucket or container where the Iceberg data files are located, or you can configure Redpanda to use an https://iceberg.apache.org/concepts/catalog/#decoupling-using-the-rest-catalog[Iceberg REST catalog^] endpoint to update an externally-managed catalog when there are changes to the Iceberg data and metadata.

image::shared:iceberg-integration.png[]

When you enable the Iceberg integration for a Redpanda topic, Redpanda brokers store streaming data in the Iceberg-compatible format in Parquet files in object storage, in addition to the log segments uploaded using Tiered Storage. Storing the streaming data in Iceberg tables in the cloud allows you to derive real-time insights through many compatible data lakehouse, data engineering, and business intelligence https://iceberg.apache.org/vendors/[tools^]. 

== Enable Iceberg integration

> To create an Iceberg table for a Redpanda topic, you must set the cluster configuration property `iceberg_enabled` to `true`, and also configure the topic property `redpanda.iceberg.mode`. You can choose to provide a schema if you need the Iceberg table to be structured with defined columns.

Reviewer 7: Should link to the cluster and topic property reference

. Set the `iceberg_enabled` configuration option on your cluster to `true`. You must restart your cluster if you change this configuration for a running cluster. 
+
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set iceberg_enabled true 
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
Successfully updated configuration. New configuration version is 2.
----

. Create a new topic.
+
[,bash,]
----

> rpk topic create <new-topic-name> --partitions 1 --replicas 1

Reviewer 7: are the flags for partitions and replicas necessary? if not, I would not add them.

----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS

> new-topic-name   OK

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
<new-topic-name>   OK
```

whenever mentioning the same variable, try to keep the tags. If you add this, check if the preview looks good before merging

--
+
[,bash]
----
rpk topic alter-config <new-topic-name> --set redpanda.iceberg.mode=<topic-iceberg-mode>
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
TOPIC            STATUS
new-topic-name   OK
----

. Register a schema for the topic. This step is required for the `value_schema_id_prefix` mode, but is optional otherwise.
+
[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create <subject-name> --schema </path-to-schema> --type <format>
----
+
[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
SUBJECT                VERSION   ID   TYPE
new-topic-name-value   1         1    PROTOBUF
----

The Iceberg table is inside a namespace called `redpanda`, and has the same name as the Redpanda topic name. As you produce records to the topic, the data also becomes available in object storage for consumption by Iceberg-compatible clients. 

== Schema support and mapping

The `redpanda.iceberg.mode` property determines how Redpanda maps the topic data to the Iceberg table structure. You can either have the generated Iceberg table match the stucture of a Avro or Protobuf schema in the Schema Registry, or use the `key_value` mode where Redpanda stores the record values as-is in the table. 

> The JSON Schema format is not supported in this beta release. If your topic data is in JSON, it is recommended to use the `key_value` mode.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The JSON Schema format is not supported. If your topic data is in JSON, it is recommended to use the `key_value` mode.
```

Remove this as we're going to GA this version

Reviewer: @Deflaimun Iceberg will continue to be in beta throughout 24.3 GA

|===

* Different flavors of time (such as `time-millis`) and timestamp (such as `timestamp-millis`) types are translated to the same Iceberg `time` and `timestamp` types respectively.
* Avro unions are flattened to Iceberg structs with optional fields:
** For example, the union `["int", "long", "float"]` is represented as an Iceberg struct `struct<0 INT NULLABLE, 1 LONG  NULLABLE, 2 FLOAT NULLABLE>`.
** The union `["int", null, "float"]` is represented as an Iceberg struct `struct<0 INT NULLABLE, 1 FLOAT NULLABLE>`.
* All fields are required by default (Avro always sets a default in binary representation).
* The Avro duration logical type is ignored.
* The Avro null type is ignored and not represented in the Iceberg schema.
* Recursive types are not supported.
--

Protobuf::
+
--
|===
| Protobuf type | Iceberg type

| bool | boolean
| double | double
| float | float
| int32 | int
| sint32 | int
| int64 | long
| sint64 | long
| sfixed32 | int
| sfixed64 | int
| string | string
| bytes | binary
| map | map
|===

* Repeated values are translated into Iceberg `array` types.
* Enums are translated into Iceberg `int` types based on the integer value of the enumerated type.

> * uint32 and fixed32 are translated into Iceberg `long` types as that is the existing semantic for unsigned 32-bit values in Iceberg.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `uint32` and `fixed32` are translated into Iceberg `long` types as that is the existing semantic for unsigned 32-bit values in Iceberg.
```

if tagging the other types, tag those too to keep consistent

> * uint64 and fixed64 values are translated into their Base-10 string representation.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `uint64` and `fixed64` values are translated into their Base-10 string representation.
```

> * The timestamp well-known type in Protobuf is translated into `timestamp` in Iceberg.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* The `timestamp` type in Protobuf is translated into `timestamp` in Iceberg.
```

is it the same format or actually translated as in modified data?

Reviewer: @rockwotj could you clarify?

Reviewer 4: I don't understand the question. If you have a Timestamp type in your protobuf (using the well known timestamp proto bundled with the protobuf library) then we translate those into Iceberg types 1:1

We can't modify any data here, everything is immutable - we just do a transform

* Messages are converted into Iceberg structs.
* Recursive types are not supported.
--
======

== Set up catalog integration

You can configure the Iceberg integration to either store the metadata in https://iceberg.apache.org/javadoc/1.5.0/org/apache/iceberg/hadoop/HadoopCatalog.html[HadoopCatalog^] format in the same object storage bucket or container, or connect to a REST-based catalog. 

Set the cluster configuration property `iceberg_catalog_type` with one of the following values:

* `rest`: Connect to and update an Iceberg catalog using a REST API. See the https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/main/open-api/rest-catalog-open-api.yaml[Iceberg REST Catalog API specification].
* `object_storage`: Write catalog files to the same object storage bucket as the data files. Use the object storage URL with an Iceberg client to access the catalog and data files for your Redpanda Iceberg tables.

> Switching catalog types is not supported.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Switching catalog types is not supported.
```

switching when? mid-flight? That's what I assume but we could clarify
Consider adding this to the limitations section if that makes sense

Reviewer: @bharathv would you be able to confirm?

Reviewer 4: Once a single topic has iceberg enabled, then you cannot change the catalog type. I don't think we enforce this

Reviewer 8: sorry just checking.. right we don't enforce it.

You'll be able to use to the catalog to load, query, or refresh the Iceberg data as you produce to the Redpanda topic. Refer to the official documentation of your query engine or Iceberg-compatible tool for guidance on integrating your Iceberg catalog. 

==== REST catalog 

For example, if you have Redpanda cluster configuration properties set to connect to a REST catalog named `streaming`:

[,yaml]
----
iceberg_rest_catalog_type: rest 
iceberg_rest_catalog_endpoint: http://catalog-service:8181 
iceberg_rest_catalog_client_id: <rest-connection-user>
iceberg_rest_catalog_client_secret: <rest-connection-password>
----

And you use Spark as a processing engine, configured to use the `streaming` catalog:

```
spark.sql.catalog.streaming = org.apache.iceberg.spark.SparkCatalog
spark.sql.catalog.streaming.type = rest
spark.sql.catalog.streaming.uri = http://catalog-service:8181
```

Using Spark SQL, you can query the Iceberg table directly by specifying the catalog name:

[,sql]
----
SELECT * FROM streaming.redpanda.ClickEvent;
----

Spark can use the REST catalog to automatically discover the topic's Iceberg table. 

==== File system-based catalog (`object_storage`)

> If you are using the `object_storage` catalog type, you must set up the catalog integration in your processing engine accordingly. For example, you can configure Spark to use a file system-based catalog with at least the following properties:

Reviewer 7: should mention that the example is for aws s3

[,bash]
----
rpk registry schema create ClickEvent-value --schema path/to/schema.avsc --type avro
----

You can then produce to the `ClickEvent` topic using the following format:

[,bash]
----
echo '"key1" {"user_id":2324,"event_type":"BUTTON_CLICK","ts":"2024-11-25T20:23:59.380Z"}' | rpk topic produce ClickEvent --format='%k %v\n' --schema-id=topic
----

The following SQL query returns values from columns in the `ClickEvent` table, with the table structure derived from the schema, and column names matching the schema fields. If you've integrated a catalog, query engines such as Spark SQL provide Iceberg integrations that allow easy discovery and access to existing Iceberg tables in object storage.

[,sql]
----
SELECT user_id, 
    event_type, 
    ts 
FROM <catalog-name>.ClickEvent;
----

[,bash,role=no-copy]
----
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
| user_id | event_type   | ts                       |
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
| 2324    | BUTTON_CLICK | 2024-11-25T20:23:59.380Z |
+---------+--------------+--------------------------+
----

=== Query topic in key-value mode

> You can also forgo using a schema, which means using semi-structured data in Iceberg. 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
You can also choose not to use a schema, allowing you to work with semi-structured data in Iceberg.
```

Consider using a more simple phrase. 'Forgo' is not common for non-native speakers

For example, if you have Redpanda cluster configuration properties set to connect to a REST catalog named `demo`:

> ```

Reviewer 7: always try to put the context for the code block. This looks like yaml config, right?
